readme.md, before:

# IDSC Workshops

This repository holds artifacts used in learning workshops coordinated
by the ISAB Data Science Committee.  Since there is no sensitive
or proprietary content, the materials are made available publicly.
Certain workshops may be repeated from time to time.  So there is an
interest in incorporating feedback to improve these materials.
If you have an idea for improvement, feel free to open an issue.

| Directory | Workshop Description                               |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------|
| [regex](regex/readme.md)| Introduction to regular expressions and their use in APIs |
| [git](git/readme.md)| Introduction to Git and GitHub |
| [distributions](distributions/readme.md)| Gaining familiarity with Python and/or R via a review of elementary probability distributions|

## Background

ISAB (Information Systems Advisory Body) is a sub-committee of the
[CCJCC](http://ccjcc.lacounty.gov/)
(Countywide Criminal Justice Coordination Committee) of Los Angeles County.
As described on the [official ISAB site](http://ccjcc.lacounty.gov/Subcommittees-Task-Forces/Information-Systems-Advisory-Board-ISAB),
ISAB is a multi-jurisdictional organization serving the justice communities
within the county.  The ISAB Data Science Committee (IDSC) addresses
data science issues faced by the community.  This repository addresses
the issues of skills development.  It is not intended as an endorsement
of any one product or technology.

## Workshops

The workshops are as interactive as possible.  Attendance in-person is
not always practical due to space, location, and time constraints.
These workshop provide materials for practitioners to reference during
the workshop as well as before/after the workshop.

Commit message:

Added section on data analysis workshops.

readme.md, after:

# IDSC Workshops

This repository holds artifacts used in learning workshops coordinated
by the ISAB Data Science Committee.  Since there is no sensitive
or proprietary content, the materials are made available publicly.
Certain workshops may be repeated from time to time.  So there is an
interest in incorporating feedback to improve these materials.
If you have an idea for improvement, feel free to open an issue.

| Directory | Workshop Description                               |
|-----------|----------------------------------------------------|
| [regex](regex/)| Introduction to regular expressions and their use in APIs |
| [git](git/)| Introduction to Git and GitHub |
| [distributions](distributions/)| Gaining familiarity with Python and/or R via a review of elementary probability distributions|
| [R Programming](ds/r/)| Statistics and Programming with R |
| [Python Programming](ds/python/)| Python and Data Analysis |

## Background

ISAB (Information Systems Advisory Body) is a sub-committee of the
[CCJCC](http://ccjcc.lacounty.gov/)
(Countywide Criminal Justice Coordination Committee) of Los Angeles County.
As described on the
[official ISAB site](http://ccjcc.lacounty.gov/Subcommittees-Task-Forces/Information-Systems-Advisory-Board-ISAB),
ISAB is a multi-jurisdictional organization serving the justice communities
within the county.  The ISAB Data Science Committee (IDSC) addresses
data science issues faced by the community.  This repository addresses
the issues of skills development.  It is not intended as an endorsement
of any one product or technology.

## Workshops

The workshops are as interactive as possible.  Attendance in-person is
not always practical due to space, location, and time constraints.
These workshop provide materials for practitioners to reference during
the workshop as well as before/after the workshop.
