---
title: Welcome
author: Paul Glezen
author_title: IT Specialist, ISAB - County of Los Angeles
author_url: https://github.com/lacounty-isab
author_image_url: https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/1967533?s=460&v=4
description: ISAB Workshop Site
---

Welcome to the ISAB Workshop Site.
[ISAB](http://ccjcc.lacounty.gov/Subcommittees-Task-Forces/Information-Systems-Advisory-Board-ISAB),
Information Systems Advisory Board (of Los Angeles County),
has been developing and delivering workshops since Spring 2017
to disseminate practical IT skills when the demand arises.

<!--truncate-->

This site provides a rendering of the workshops in a more
managable and "tech-friendly" format.  In the past I provided
them as

* presentation slides and

* GitHub `readme.md` files.

Slides are optimal for a live presentation.  Slide numbers clearly
identify to everyone where we are and help reference other locations.
But not every concept fits neatly onto a slide.
Source code samples often do not occupy space efficiently on a slide.
Slides have trouble rendering source code with syntax highlighting.
The file format of slide software such as MS Powerpoint and
LibreOffice Impress is binary - making it more difficult to determine
differences between versions.

GitHub markdown rendering is great for providing minimal
presentation features for technical documentation.  The fact that it's
self-hosting and renders automatically is another benefit.
But for longer documents, it lacks navigation features that can lead
the reader to feeling lost in a "scrolling desert".

I began evaluating [Docusaurus](https://v2.docusaurus.io/) in Summer
2020 to host API documentation.  It's one of many so-called Static
Site Generators (SSGs), but with an emphasis on sites that host
technical documentation.  Its markdown support provides extra features
that are commonly used for technical docs, especially programming
language code.  This site was generated by Docusaurus.

:::note
As of Summer 2020, Los Angeles County web content filtering blocked
the [Docusuarus](https://v2.docusaurus.io/) website.  LA County employees
can only view it from outside the county network (e.g. their home office).
:::
